# Specificity in Strength Training for Acrobatics

*by Flosha, 18.04.2025*

You become better at what you train. The more specific your required or desired skills and the more specific your strength training is to these skills, the better you will become in performing them. Therefore we are aiming to make all of our training specific to what it should eventually enable us to do. 

Thereby the strength requirements and skills of base and top partners are different due to their different roles in the sport. Therefore I am dividing this article in: 
* [Specificity in the Preparation of Bases](#specificity-in-the-preparation-of-bases)
* [Specificity in the Preparation of Tops](#specificity-in-the-preparation-of-tops)

But before we deal with the specific preparation of the partners and their differences, we will have to clarify some general terms and principles. After which we can then show how these principles are applied in the specific preparation of bases and tops. 

At first we have to understand that there are fundamental differences between training for (1) Mass, (2) Strength and (3) Skill Strength. And all three of these categories of training are necessary, but in different ways for bases and tops.


## 




## Specificity in the Preparation of Bases




**Mass vs. Strength:** Mass training is necessary to some degree (much more important for bases than for tops), because while mass does *not* equal strength, it can be understood as *strength potential*. You are not necessarily stronger if you have more muscle mass, but you have more potential of strength-output than with less mass. To simplify (obviously it depends on additional factors): If someone with less muscle mass is stronger than someone with more mass in absolute terms, the one with less mass uses his strength potential better and the other one uses it less. 
After a phase focused on strength the one with more mass may become stronger and the other one will not easily be able to overcome him in strength again in lack of muscle mass because he uses his full potential already. Before he can become stronger he has to build more muscle first. Thus both mass building and strength building is necessary. They differ in volume, intensity, rep range, reps in reserve, speed, rest time, exercise selection and so on. While strength training will also be able to carry-over to more mass and mass building will carry-over to more strength, they are basically two different approaches to training. Approaching them on their own has been proven to be more effective. But some people respond better to higher intensity and less volume, others respond better to less intensity and higher volume.

**Basic Strength vs. Skill Strength:** When we are speaking of "Skill Strength" we are not speaking of Skill Training. Skill Training is simply practicing acrobatic skills. Skill Strength Training is doing skill-specific strength exercises to become stronger in the skills. To explain the difference: One may have the goal to achieve the "Planche". For doing so he will need to constantly practice specific skills that are reasonable to do at his level. This is his skill training. But the skill he aims for is yet way too hard to practice. He recognises that he has to become stronger and that his muscle mass may not suffice. Thus he will start to build muscle necessary for the skill, such as by practicing weighted push-ups or incline bench press in a mass cycle (or several ones if necessary). After (and to some degree simultaneously) to having build more mass, he will work on expressing more strength through this mass (using more of his potential) through basic strength exercises, such as, in this case, again: Weighted Push-ups or Incline Bench Press, but now with a strength focused programming, strength rep range, intensity, volume, speed and rest. After (and to some degree simultaneously) he will then focus on expressing this strength in skills through skill strength exercises, such as variations of Planche Push-ups.

It is totally possible to not approach the training in this way. It is simply a way that has been proven to be effective and is currently recommended by diverse experts in the field. But all of these exercises in their different rep ranges, speed, rest times etc. could also be done simultaneously. E.g. you could also have a mixed mass + strength programming, where you work in more of a mass building fashion a few days a week and more in a strength building fashion on other days. And depending on if one of the two is currently of higher relevance for your situation you may put more focus on one or the other (e.g. have 80% of your training be mass focused and 20% strength or vice versa). 

It is also possible to replace all or most basic strength exercises with skill strength exercises in order to have the highest specificity in training. The problem with this approach is that many skills (such as the planche or planche push-ups) are very hard on the joints and are not as easy to use and sustain without injury when practiced all the time than regular exercises such as weighted push-ups. But it can be done if one is very advanced in his level of preparation and can handle it. Thus, only using skill strength exercises for strength training is not for beginners, it is for advanced athletes with enough preparation. But it is the eventual goal in order to train with more specificity and become excellent in skill execution.

To apply this knowledge to the training of bases: The skills that the bases have to master primarily, are tempos and landings/catches in diverse positions for dynamic, and mounts, motions and holds in diverse positions for balance. 

Balance, where it is not about pure skill training with little intensity, is primarily about overhead stability and strength on one arm (the mobility will be developed automatically if training stability and strength correctly). Thus when we want to train skill strength for balance in the *most specific way*, so that the weight of our tops will feel easy, we have to try using the next best exercises to balancing a partner. 

On two arms (1) just holding/carrying a barbell overhead - is not very specific because of the much lower centre of mass, but can be useful nonetheless. (2) Holding/carrying a barbell with the addition of weight plates dangling from elastic bands attached to the sides for extra instability. (3) Using self-build equipment simulating two arms with weight on top. This can be a metal construction with the possibility to load via plates, it also could be a wooden construct with a sort of simulated torso filled with sand bags etc. If there is not any such equipment available or not reasonable to use (4) holding other bases on ones hands in different positions can build significant amounts of additional strength and can well suffice to become strong enough that the top will be very easy to hold, if a reasonable weight difference between the base and top is given.  

For one arm balance: Holding a barbell regularly on one arm would be very unspecific due to the much lower centre of mass. What for regular weightlifters is already an exotic and cirquesque exercise that is apparently only done by oldtime strongman enthusiasts, is too unspecific for the training of acrobats. It may be done if there are no other options available. Good options are (1) balancing a barbell vertically with weight added to the top or (2) balancing heavy kettlebells in the bottom-up position, which additionally strengthens the wrists/grip necessary in one arms tremendeously or (3) using specifically build equipment that simulates the balance of a partner even better while allowing to increase the weight in small, incremental steps. The best self-build equipment for this purpose is a T-shaped bar with an angled handle at the bottom (like in blocks for tops) and the possibility to both load the two "legs" on the left and right (the horizontal bar of the "T"), as well as the centre on top and/or below the horizontal bar of the construct. This way the weight distribution of the partner in a handstand is simulated most accurately. The problem with such equipment is that they require high ceilings and that it is very difficult (if not dangerous) to get them into position on ones own (and especially getting them down safely again) if substantially loaded. Therefore they are recommended to be used with a pulley system, where the coach can help to get them into position and can help to bring them down safely. As described for the two arm preparation: If none of these options are available, the simplest solution is to hold other bases on one arm in different positions, which can well suffice to strengthen and prepare the base for one arm balance of the top, if a reasonable weight difference between the base and top is given. 

Vertically held and top-weighted barbells require high ceilings, much higher than available in most commercial gyms, where it won't be possible even when sitting down. Other than that it will of course be forbidden to do in commercial gyms due to (valid) safety concerns. In gymnastic halls one should be aware that it will absolutely destroy the spring floor (and almost any other floor) when falling down. Additionally, when the weight should fall down, apart from a risk for anyone around a rather wide radius being hitted by the weight, there is additional risk involved due to it only being weighted on one side. Depending on how the barbell lands, the un-weighted side of the barbell could be suddenly snap up upon landing like if stepping on a rake and causing serious injury. Additionally it is hard to get it into and out of position. A rather safe environment to use it in would be outside in grass. 

The solution with the pulley system is safe to use. The weight could always dangle at a specific height that is low enough for you to easily get it into position, but high enough for it to not hit you if you loose balance. This way it could be used independently when training alone. Nonetheless it requires an advanced setup and dedicated gym. 

The solution with a heavier partner is the most versatile to use. It is easy to get into position, there is no additional equipment needed, only another base. Safety can be ensured well through very simple basic provisions. And if necessary it can be done in a seated position in every room independent of the height of the ceiling. The only caveat is that it is more difficult to load in incremental steps, if there are not many heavier tops or bases of different weight available. Ancle weights and weighted vests become very useful then. 


## Specificity in the Preparation of Tops

...
