# Acrobatic Training Philosophies: Modern and Traditional Approach

*by Flosha, 16.04.2025*

Among professional acro coaches the training of gymnasts is approached in very different ways. Some coaches swear by excessive planning, sometimes years ahead, including periodisation, rated perceived exertion (RPE) and lots of measurements and written records. Others aren't doing almost any planning at all, have no written record, neither of the athletes progress nor of their training programme and go by intuition day by day. Some elite coaches see themselves more as "service providers" in the context of modern society, while others see themselves as preservers of an art, like respected master craftsmen in medieval society. Both approaches have been proven (and keep proving) to lead to succesful results by innumerable athletes. Both ways of training are still practiced today by different coaches with different training philosophies. 

The first approach, which I would describe as the "modern way", is backed by science and works. But the "intuitive" and as such more "traditional" approach is not less professional. We may rather say that it requires more experience in order to be done effectively. Going by intuition should not be an approach for beginners: The less knowledge one has and the less insight into the physical and mental state of their athletes and the less one understands the synergy of specific areas of training or how to balance out the load on a day by day basis, the more trouble will be caused by a lack of planning and the more planning will be needed to prevent overuse injury. The efficiency of the intuitive approach depends on the knowledge and experience of the coach (and at some point of the athletes themselves, which have responsibility too) and the structure of the training. 

Both approaches have in common, that ideally the athletes are constantly taught to become more and more independent and take responsibility. A good coach manages to reduce his need and step away to let them perform independently and feel safe on their own. But other then that the two approaches are based on two very different premises and assumptions about training: 
* The "modern" approach puts more focus on the individual; it deems it very relevant what the individual feels and designs the training around it, it puts the individual first and considers training to be something that "serves" the individual. To the athletes their coach is like a service provider; they may admire him for his knowledge and professionalism and kindness and even consider him a friend, but he remains a service provider. Here it is the athletes dreams that the coach makes his own and tries helping them to achieve.
* The traditional approach puts more focus on the art of training itself; the individual doesn't play much of a role, the training is in focus and the individual transcends in training. The coach is not as much committed to the athletes as to the art. To the coach, the athletes should strive to become ideal embodiments of the art and the coach is transforming them into these embodiments like a craftsmen; to the athletes the coach is like a master working on the material of their body and they devote themselves to the art that the coach wants to express "through them" or wants them to express. It is the coaches plan and vision that the athletes make their own and act out. 

While the "modern coach" is "providing" training to his athletes (which most often are paying for the service) and adjusts the training programme constantly, adjusting the work load constantly according to the perceived needs of his athletes, the more traditional coach (who traditionally is not paid by the athletes at all, but provided for in other ways) with more focus on the art of training itself instead of on the individual, is convinced that his training programme, if it is structured well enough (as he does intuitively based on his knowledge and experience), will not lead to injury independent of the constant work load, because the different training systems that his training consists of, balance out the load and keep the athletes healthy. 

The modern coach, focused on the individual, approaches training somewhat like this: "I train everyone. You and/or your parents have specific goals and we agree on them like in a contract. My job is to help you achieve them. You only work as hard as your body can manage. We have to make sure that you won't do too much in order to prevent injury and I will adjust my training around these needs of yours. If my athletes don't train hard enough it is my failure that I couldn't motivate them enough. If I cannot lead them to success I haven't fulfilled my side of the contract. But as much as I may love the sports and success, the well-being of my athletes comes first and I have to make the training fit into their lifes. While I have to push them to some degree in order to make progress, it is inacceptable to train them through tears."

The traditional coach on the other hand is rigorous about the work: "The work has to be done. If it can't be done you must work harder. You won't injure your body if we balance out this strenuous work with enough additional work of "regenerative" nature, to remain healthy. It is not my job to motivate you. If you can't stand this training you can go home, as you don't have the spirit to become an Acrobat. There is no sense in training you then. I train you and give you my all, if you're willing to put in the work and give everything, no more, no less. You organise your life around the training, I won't organise my training around your life. I will not promise you to give you success in sports and I am not doing this for you or for your parents. It's about the work, the practice of the art, that both me and you are (or ought to be) commited to; success is a result of this commitment, not the goal. If you have this commitment to it, there is joy and passion in the work inspite of any hardship and tears."

